
Lesson #8: ZCML, old style products, and the rest
=================================================

Before we move on, there is more to the Lesson #7 story. Namely, that of ZCML configuration. As of version 2.5 or so, Plone is a "Zope 3 application" (meaning that it uses technologies developed under the now defunct Zope 3 project) [1]_.

ZCML
----

Zope configuration markup language. E.g.::

    <configure>
        <!-- configuration goes here -->
    </configure>

What does this mean
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In most cases, for end users, nothing. While ZCML configuration is something you should understand the basics of, there are other technologies that are designed specifically to save you from having to understand ZCML in detail. They are:

* Mainly z3c.autoinclude.
* And to some extent, five.grok (Grok integration layer for Plone) [2]_.

The former (z3c.autoinclude) is a technology that Plone uses to auto-load ZCML for any package that requests it.

The latter (five.grok) is a technology that other technologies (like Dexterity) are using in Plone to provide "imperative" configuration (vs. declarative.)

In some cases though (i.e. when add-ons do not ask z3c.autoinclude to autoload their ZCML), it means you must configure the ``zcml`` parameter in the ``plone.recipe.zope2instance`` section for whatever add-on you want to use that does not take advantage of ``z3c.autoinclude``.

While we are on the subject of technologies you may come across but shouldn't worry too much about if they confuse you, let's cover an important "legacy" technology.

Old style products
------------------

Another important technology to be aware of is that of "old style products". That is, Python code that is not distributed 
within a Python package (e.g. distutils module, egg).

At some point in time (very roughly 2000-2005), Zope2 only supported add-on code via "products". Products are Python code modules that Zope2 looks for on start up [3]_.

The rest
--------

In general, there are any number of technologies and related terms that could potentially confuse new Plone users. Before you worry about such things, you should ask on a mailing list or `Stack Overflow`_ to see if it something worth understanding (e.g Python eggs) or not (e.g. DTML).

.. [1] Zope 3 the application server was renamed to Bluebream. Many other Zope 3 technologies now live under the Zope Toolkit umbrella, the most notable of which are zope.component and zope.interface.

.. [2] More so for developers than end users.

.. [3] See http://collective-docs.plone.org/tutorials/old-style-vs-new-style/packaging.html for more.

.. _`Stack Overflow`: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/plone

