
Lesson #8: The inconvenient truth: ZCML, old style products, and the rest
=========================================================================

The inconvenient truth behind Lesson #7 is that there is more to the story. Namely, that of ZCML configuration. As of version 2.5 or so, Plone is a "Zope 3 application" (meaning that it uses technologies developed under the now defunct Zope 3 project) [1]_.

ZCML
----

Zope configuration markup language

What does this mean
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In most cases, for end users, nothing. While ZCML configuration is something you should understand the basics of, there are other technologies that are designed specifically to save you from having to understand it. They are:

* Mainly z3c.autoinclude.
* And to some extent, five.grok (Grok integration layer for Plone)[2]_.

The former (z3c.autoinclude) is a technology that Plone uses to auto-load ZCML for any package that requests it.

The latter (five.grok) is a technology that other technologies (like Dexterity) are using in Plone to provide "imperative" configuration (vs. declarative.)

In some cases though (i.e. when add-ons do not ask z3c.autoinclude to autoload their ZCML), it means you must configure the ``zcml`` parameter in the ``plone.recipe.zope2instance`` section for whatever add-on you want to use that does not take advantage of ``z3c.autoinclude``.

Old style products
------------------

Another technology to be aware of is that of "old style products". That is, Python code that is not distributed within a Python package (e.g. distutils module, egg).

At some point in time (very roughly 2000-2005), Zope2 only supported add-on code via "products". Products are Python code modules that Zope2 looks for on start up[3]_.

.. [1] Zope 3 the application server was renamed to Bluebream. Many other Zope 3 technologies now live under the Zope Toolkit umbrella, the most notable of which are zope.component and zope.interface.
.. [2] More so for developers than end users.
.. [3] See http://collective-docs.plone.org/tutorials/old-style-vs-new-style/packaging.html for more.
